And a welcome back.
Hopefully those exercises weren't too tough and you breezed right through them.
We're going to talk about something called control flow.
Up until now we've been doing this.
This little arrow we write a line of code.
Then another line of code then another line of code.
Then another line of code and everything executes in one line just flows.
Just kind of like water if you're pouring water down is just going straight down.
But what if we had conditions.
What if we want to say something like If use your name is Bob say hi Bob.
If not say I don't know you.
Maybe sign in again or we don't have this user that's called conditional execution and it looks something
like this where we get to a point in the program and we have two options where we either want to go
one way or the other and then continue executing so in this lesson we're going to talk about exactly
that Conditional Execution let's try some out
so javascript conditionals.
That's what they're called.
We're going to start off with what's called an if statement and an if statement kind of reads like English
we can do something similar to this.
I say if name equals remember three equals signs here because we're not assigning a variable we're comparing
if name equals Billy
closed the bracket.
And this is just a notation that you'll have to get used to again is just like learning a language.
You just have to know that when you're doing an if statement you have to have these brackets closed
the brackets and then you do curly bracket hold shift and enter so that the program that doesn't execute
and will say I've added a tab just so you can see for indentation I can say alert
Hi Billy
and I closed the bracket and again just like I said each expression something that produces a value
needs to have a semicolon and you might think that you need a semicolon here.
But again with an if statement you don't add one but alert that's an expression we add a semicolon here.
Now you might be asking yourself well we haven't assigned a variable to name yet so let's do that.
I'm going to say name variable name equals.
We'll say Billy and I'm going to press censure let's see what happens High Belly.
OK.
So that looks like it's working just the double check.
What if I change name to Susie looks semicolon not called OK.
And now if we run this program again I'm going to just copy it if name equals Billy alert.
Hi Billy nothing happens.
I just get undefined and no alert so that's a conditional statement.
But let's be realistic here.
You often won't just have code that executes when a condition holds true but also code that handles
other cases such as when the name isn't Billy.
Maybe when the name is Susie so this alternate path is shown if you remember in the diagram by the alternate
arrow we need to have an alternate route in case the name doesn't equal Billy so let's go back again
and see what we can do.
So the second key word that we're going to learn is else so you can do something like If name equals
Billy and I just press right here.
Here again Google Chrome is smart enough to know that you've typed this before and now instead of leaving
it like that I now press space else.
So if Naomi goes belly alert HI BILLY else it kind of reads like English right.
And then again else opening curly bracket closing curly bracket and within here I'm going to say alert.
I don't know you.
So now let's see what happens.
And why is that.
Because if you remember name you call Susie.
If I change name to
Billy
well and redo the program again.
Hi Billy.
So that's what's called an if else statement you write a condition if something equals true then do
something else do something else.
And this is just a syntax you'll have to learn.
But as you can see it's fairly easy you read it a couple times and you'll get the hang of it OK.
But now you might have another question what if what if you have something like this something a little
bit more complicated like this where you have multiple conditions.
Let's see what I'm talking about.
By showing you another example in this one we're going to use something called else F.
So again I'm going to say f name equals Billy.
Again I'm just going to press the right key here and it's going to load up what I've written before.
So if name equals Billy alert.
Hi Billy.
Else alert.
I don't know.
But what if we also want to check for the name Susie.
Well I can do something like else if name equals Susie close bracket.
I'm going to say
hi Susie and at the end here you can leave it as is or again we can add an else statement.
So with both of these fail both of these comparisons fail I can say else alert.
I don't know you
close the bracket again don't forget to close and close the bracket press enter and says Hi Billy.
Because remember my name is Billy.
But if I do name equals Susie
and I rerun the program again press the Cherokee and I press enter again.
Hi Susie that's pretty cool right.
You can think of this counting how passwords work right.
This is what forms are doing they're checking your e-mail and checking your password using simple logic
like this.
Now I want to show you also with conditionals what's very useful and that's something called logical
operators.
I'm going to show you the three of them if I can on comment this.
There you go.
And these are the three so let's clean this up and try something.
I can go if name equals Billy
or these two lines so it's right above your enter key.
This means or in JavaScript for name equals an
then alert
hi billy or an
closer bracket.
What do you think will happen here.
Let's see.
Name equals
re execute the program.
Press enter again.
Hi Billy or n.
But if now the name is
Han and I re execute the program press enter again.
Hi Billy or an that's that's pretty cool I can do or comparison what's another one that we can do.
Well we can also do and which is two of these sites and this means if name equals Billy and name equals
and let's see if this works.
No let's to name equals N and we do the program and I'm not getting anything What if I do Billy
and execute.
No nothing.
Why is that.
Well this doesn't make sense right.
I mean name equals Billy and name equals.
And but as we've discussed a variable holds well holds a value.
It's a drawer in your desk and it has a certain type of look to it.
It either has a pen or a bunch of files it can have both billion and a lease.
Now with what we've learned so far so this doesn't make sense where you would use end is maybe to check
somebodies name so I can do.
If first name remember I'm using camel case here Bob Dent last name equals Smith closer bracket curly
brackets.
I'm going to say alert.
Hi Bob Smith closer brackets curly brackets press enter.
And looks like I made a mistake here and it says first name is not defined.
And while that's true because I've never said what first name is and last name this before I've already
defined what name was.
But it needs to know what these variables are otherwise saying hey I'm javascript and I've never encountered
these words before where are you talking about.
So before we do this we have to say variable first name equals Bob and variable last name equals
OK.
I actually want to draw your attention back to the air you'll get this a lot when you're starting off
reference their first name is not defined.
It's pretty good air but keep that in mind reference area just means I I don't know what this value
is it's not referencing anything OK so now that we have first name and last name defined we press up
again to get to our little execution piece here and I go press enter again.
Hi Bob Smith.
If I change the first name or last name to say JONES PRESENTER And let's re execute this piece of code
I get nothing because first name and last name must match OK I have one last one over here and that's
the exclamation point or exclamation mark not point.
Let's see what it does.
This is a little bit tricky but see if you can follow along here.
If exclamation mark name equals Bob opening brackets alert Hi Bob and close the press enter and I get.
Bob.
OK let's remember one name was it's Billy.
Why am I getting high Bob when Billy's the name clearly name doesn't equal Bob because of this.
This is the not operator.
So it's the opposite.
So it turns this expression which is name equals Bob which is false to true so just to show you if I
go this and then false I get true and if I go this true I get false.
So that's why I use the brackets here I'm saying evaluate this and once you do this add the opposite
to not and it seems like why would I ever want to do that.
When would I ever use this.
And this is a good thing to use whenever let's say you want to turn off a switch.
So just like I showed you if I go not true I can say now it's off.
Not false light comes on.
So you'll see cases when we do use this.
And I promise you it's very very very important that we have it in the language.
So let's just review what we've learned up to this point so that in the next video we have a sense of
where we've been and where we've got we've talked about JavaScript types we've learned about numbers
strings billions and undefined.
We've also learned about JavaScript comparisons that we use sometimes in conditional statements like
if statements.
We've learned about JavaScript variables we've learned about JavaScript conditionals that if else else
if statements and we've learned about JavaScript logical operators these and or and exclamation marks
and there's a few more that we haven't covered yet.
And don't worry we will.
I know this is confusing.
This is new syntax it's learning a new language but it's not too bad.
It definitely doesn't have as many words as a real language.
You just have to get used to this and practice typing in the console and practice with the problems
and get yourself familiar with running these syntax is and it will click and it'll become second nature.
Like I said everybody goes through this you'll get it.
I promise I know I keep saying this but I only say because I know when I started learning this stuff
that's how I felt and and that's how everybody else feels so I want to just make sure that don't worry
you'll get there you're gonna be a master of JavaScript by the end of this course so I'll see you on
the next one.
Can't wait to show you more.
Talk to you then.
Bye bye.